=head1 NAME

Gtk2::api - Mapping the Gtk+ C API to perl

=head1 ABSTRACT

The Gtk2 module attempts to stick as close as is reasonable to the C API,
to minimize the need to maintain documentation which is nearly a copy of
the C API reference documentation.  However, the world is not perfect, and
the mappings between C and perl are not as clean and predictable as you 
might wish.  Thus, this page described the basics of how to map the C API to
the perl API, and lists various points in the API which follow neither the
C API documentation nor the mapping principles.

=head1 DESCRIPTION

FIXME The list of specific differences is not complete.

The canonical documentation is the C API reference at
http://developer.gnome.org/doc/API/gtk/ and
http://developer.gnome.org/doc/API/gdk/

There are two main sections: 'BINDING BASICS' describes the principles on which
the bindings work; understanding these can lead you to guess the proper syntax
to use for any given function described in the C API reference.  The second
section lists various specific points of difference which don't necessarily
correspond with what you expect; this section is in three main parts: missing
methods, renamed methods, and different call signatures.

=head1 BINDING BASICS

Anything listed as "deprecated" in the C API reference does not appear in the
bindings.  Many functions refer to C concepts which are alien to the bindings.
many things have replacements.

=head2 Namespaces and Objects

The namespaces of the C libraries are mapped to perl packages according to
scope, although in some cases the distinction may seem rather arbitrary:

 g_ => Glib  (the Glib module - distributed separately)
 gtk_ => Gtk2
 gdk_ => Gtk2::Gdk
 gdk_pixbuf_ => Gtk2::Gdk::Pixbuf
 pango_ => Gtk2::Pango

Objects get their own namespaces, in a way, as the concept of the GType is
completely replaced in the perl bindings by the perl package name.  This goes
for GBoxed, GObject, and even things like Glib::String and Glib::Int (which are
needed for specifying column types in the Gtk2::TreeModel).  (Flags and
enums are special -- see below.)

 GtkButton => Gtk2::Button
 GdkPixbuf => Gtk2::Gdk::Pixbuf
 GtkScrolledWindow => Gtk2::ScrolledWindow
 PangoFontDescription => Gtk2::Pango::FontDescription

With this package mapping and perl's built-in method lookup, the bindings can
do object casting for you.  This gives us a rather comfortably object-oriented
syntax, using normal perl syntax semantics:

  in C:
    GtkWidget * b;
    b = gtk_check_button_new_with_mnemonic ("_Something");
    gtk_toggle_button_set_active (GTK_TOGGLE_BUTTON (b), TRUE);
    gtk_widget_show (b);

  in perl:
    my $b = Gtk2::CheckButton->new ('_Something');
    $b->set_active (1);
    $b->show;

You see from this that constructors for most widgets which allow mnemonics
will use mnemonics by default in their "new" methods.  For those who don't
guess this right off, Gtk2::Button->new_with_mnemonic is also available.
Cast macros are not necessary, and your code is a lot shorter.

=head2 Flags and Enums

Constants are handled as strings, because it's much more readable than numbers,
and because it's automagical thanks to the GType system.  Constants are
referred to by their nicknames; basically, strip the common prefix, lower-case
it, and optionally convert '_' to '-':

  GTK_WINDOW_TOPLEVEL => 'toplevel'
  GTK_BUTTONS_OK_CANCEL => 'ok-cancel' (or 'ok_cancel')

Flags are a special case.  You can't (sensibly) bitwise-or these
string-constants, so you provide a reference to an array of them instead.
Anonymous arrays are useful here, and an empty anonymous array is a simple
way to say 'no flags'.

  FOO_BAR_BAZ | FOO_BAR_QUU | FOO_BAR_QUUX => [qw/baz quu qux/]
  0 => []

In some cases you need to see if a bit is set in a bitfield; the best thing i
can think of for that is

 in C:
  /* event->state is a bitfield */
  if (event->state & GDK_CONTROL_MASK)
          g_printerr ("control was down\n");

 in perl:
  # $event->state is a reference to an array of flag constants
  warn "control was down\n"
      if grep {/control-mask/} @{ $event->state };

FIXME if anyone can think of a better way to check this, i'm all ears.

The gtk stock item stuff is a little different -- the GTK_STOCK_* constants
are actually macros which evaluate to strings, so they aren't handled by the
mechanism described above; you just specify the string, e.g., 
GTK_STOCK_OK => 'gtk-ok'.   I don't know where the docs are for those strings,
but it's been my first guess every time.

=head2 Memory Handling

The functions for ref'ing and unref'ing objects and free'ing boxed structures
are not even mapped to perl, because it's all handled automagically by the
bindings.  I could write a treatise on how we're handling reference counts and
object lifetimes, but all you need to know as perl developer is that it's
handled for you, and the object will be alive so long as you have a perl scalar
pointing to it or the object is referenced in another way, e.g. from a container.

=head2 Miscellaneous

In C you can only return one value from a function, and it is a common practice
to modify pointers passed in to simulate returning multiple values.  In perl,
you can return lists; any functions which modify arguments have been changed
to return them instead.  A common idiom in gtk is returning gboolean, and 
modifying several arguments if the function returns TRUE; for such functions,
the perl wrapper just returns an empty list on failure.

  in C:  foo_get_baz_and_quux (foo, &baz, &quux);
  in perl:  ($baz, $quux) = $foo->get_baz_and_quux;

Most things that take or return a GList, GSList, or array of values will use
native perl arrays (or the argument stack) instead.

You don't need to specify string lengths, although string length
parameters should still be available for functions dealing with binary
strings. You can always use C<substr> to pass different parts of a string.

Anything that uses GError in C will C<croak> on failure, setting $@ to the
returned error message.  The ideology here is that GError is to be used
for runtime exceptions, and C<croak> is how you do that in perl.  You can
catch a croak very easily by wrapping the function in an eval:

   eval { $image = Gtk2::Image->new_from_file ($filename); };
   if ($@) {
        # couldn't open the file, $@ has the message
   } else {
        # do something with $pixbuf
   }

This has the added advantage of letting you bunch things together as you would
with a try/throw/catch block in C++ -- you get cleaner code.

Use normal perl callback/closure tricks with callbacks.  The most common use
you'll have for callbacks is with the Glib signal_connect method:

  $widget->signal_connect (event => \&event_handler, $user_data);
  $button->signal_connect (clicked => sub { warn "hi!\n" });

Note that the $user_data is optional, and with perl closures, you don't often
need it.

A major change from gtk-perl (the bindings for Gtk+-1.x) is that callbacks
take their arguments in the order proscribed by the C documentation, and only
one value is available for user data.  gtk-perl allowed you to pass multiple
values for user_data, and always brought in the user_data immediately after
the instance reference; this proved to be rather confusing, and did not follow
the C API reference, so we decided not to do that for gtk2-perl.

=head1 MISSING METHODS

=over

=item g_object_ref	=> no replacement

=item g_object_unref	=> no replacement

=item g_boxed_free	=> no replacement

The bindings do automatic memory management. You should never need to use these.

=item gtk_timeout_add    => Glib::Timeout->add

=item gtk_timeout_remove => Glib::Source->remove

=item gtk_idle_add       => Glib::Idle->add

=item gtk_idle_remove    => Glib::Source->remove

=item gtk_input_add      => Glib::IOChannel->add_watch

=item gtk_input_remove   => Glib::Source->remove

The gtk_* functions are deprecated in favor of the g_* ones.  Gtk2::Helper
has a wrapper for Glib::IOChannel->add_watch which makes it behave more
like gtk_input_add.

=back


=head1 RENAMED METHODS

=over

=item gtk_aspect_frame_set	=> $aspect_frame->set_params

Avoid a clash with $gobject->set.

=back


=head1 DIFFERENT CALL SIGNATURES OR SEMANTICS

As a general rule function that take a pair of parameters, a list and the
number of elements in that list, will normally omit the number of elements
and just accept a variable number of arguments that will be converted into
the list and number of elements. In many instances parameters have been
reordered so that this will work. See below for exceptions and specific
cases.

=over

=item Gtk2::ItemFactory::create_items

The n_entries parameter has been ommited and callback_data is accepted as the
first parameter. All parameters after that are considered to be entries.

=item Gtk2::List::insert_items

Position and items parameters flipped order so that an open ended parameter
list could be used. C<< $list->insert_items($position, $item1, $item2, ...) >>
(Note that GtkList and GtkListItem are deprecated and only included b/c
GtkCombo still makes use of them, they are subject to removal at any point so
you should not utilize them unless absolutly necessary.)

=item Gtk2::TreeModel->get

If no column idexes are passed all columns are returned as an array. This is a
slight deviation from the C api that can be easily impelemented in the wrappers
and may be useful. If you don't know it's there it should in no way effect the
behavior of the function.

=item Gtk2::TreeSelection::get_selected

In scalar context, returns $iter; in list context, returns ($model, $iter).

=item Gtk2::TreeSelection::get_selected_rows

Returns @paths; model is not returned as documented in the C API.
to get the model, try C<< $selection->get_tree_view->get_model >>.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

The canonical documentation is the C API reference at
http://developer.gnome.org/doc/API/gtk/ and
http://developer.gnome.org/doc/API/gdk/

There should be a similar document for Glib --- link to it here when it exists.

=head1 AUTHOR

muppet E<lt>scott at asofyet dot orgE<gt>

=cut

